---
title: Cosmology and Beliefs
layout: page
permalink: /presettlement/cosmology/
---

*As told by Parru Gupii.*

The beliefs of the Ngujari tribe have been handed down orally from generation
to generation. The defining characteristic of the belief system is its focus on
anthropomorphised animals. The actions and relationships of these animals have
shaped the world and its inhabitants.

# Creation

The creation of the world of *Yawirra* revolves around the most revered animal:
*Yuparrna*, the Eagle.

In the beginning, there was only the river, *Palayi*, which stretched
infinitely in all directions, constantly flowing but never ending. Yuparrna
lived above the river, soaring in the updrafts throughout the endless daylight.
In his claws, he carried a large rock, which he used to prevent himself from
being pushed upwards by the wind into *Pawpa*, the place of the afterlife.

Yuparrna lived like this for many years, eating fish from the river, but he
began to grow very old, until he could no longer catch fish. Knowing that he
was close to death, he decided to finally enter the afterlife, and dropped his
rock. While Yuparrna ascended to Pawpa, to live in peace for eternity, the rock
fell into the river and created a small island. Gradually, the dirt and mud of
the river coalesced around the rock, expanding it into the land of Yawirra.

At first, although the forests and plants quickly grew on the land, there was
no animate life. The constant daylight meant that the fish in the river could
not leave the water and settle on land. However, in the centre of Yawirra grew
a eucalyptus tree known as *Ngarlta*, which stretched higher and higher as time
went on, far above its surrounding trees. Eventually, it grew so high that it
entered into Pawpa, in the process blocking out the sun for half of each day.

With the daylight now interrupted by darkness, the fish emerged from the river
and became land animals, including the first humans. Now, the Ngujari live
close to the ocean and rivers, because they know that if Ngarlta is destroyed,
they will have to return to the water.

# Life and Death

All life begins with *Ngarlta*, which acts as a conduit between those who live
in Yawirra and those in the afterlife. When a Ngujari woman falls pregnant, she
must go to the sacred tree with the father and sleep there for three nights,
performing a number of ceremonies in order to ask Yuparrna to bless her with a
child.

Life is differentiated by the presence of blood. If Yuparrna decides to gift
the woman a child, he fills her pregnant stomach with new blood in order to
animate the growing child. However, if he does not believe that the time is
right for another Ngujari child, he instead fills her with ancestral blood,
from the bodies of those who are already in the afterlife. While this leads to
miscarriage, because a person cannot be reborn from Pawpa, it is seen as a
great honour. To carry the ancestral blood represents Yuparrna's belief in the
woman's responsibility and suitability, even though a child is not desired.

Aside from the need for new blood, which is gifted by Yuparrna, to be a human
the child also has need of a *Muu*, or spirit, which is given to them by the
Elders of the tribe. After a child is born, the Elders wait for a period of one
month before performing the ceremony in which a Muu is bestowed upon the child,
and a name is given to it.

The presence of Pawpa means that death is a natural part of life. While the
deceased's family and friends are encouraged to grieve, those in the afterlife
welcome all dead, and consequently the event is also a hopeful one. The body of
the deceased is taken to its birthplace, Ngarlta, where it is cremated in the
presence of the whole tribe. Through burning, its Muu is freed to rise up along
Ngarlta into Pawpa. The ashes of the body, which contain the once-new blood
gifted by Yuparrna, are given back to the ocean where they may flow freely.
