---
title: Magic
layout: page
permalink: /presettlement/magic/
---

*As told by Parru Gupii.*

Yawirra is a land deeply entwined with magic, which is concentrated into
geographical hotspots and can be harnessed by a highly-trained subset of the
inhabitants: the Panyarni.

# Magical Ability

In Ngujari inheritance, the population is split into four "totems": the seal,
the black wallaby, the platypus, and the satin bowerbird. People of each can
more easily utilise the magic of a single *Nnurru*, and may have access to
exclusive techniques. The pattern of totem inheritance is rigid but simple, with
a woman of a specific totem obliged to partner with a man of another prescribed
totem to produce offspring of an entirely different totem. However, the
inheritance is ultimately cyclic.

| Man       | Woman     | Offspring |
|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| Seal      | Wallaby   | Platypus  |
| Wallaby   | Seal      | Bowerbird |
| Bowerbird | Platypus  | Wallaby   |
| Platypus  | Bowerbird | Seal      |

While magical ability is inherent in all Ngujari people, most do not have the
required strength to use it. The small subset of the population who are deemed
able are trained to join the Panyarni, an elite band of hunters who use their
magic to investigate and defend the Ngujari against the presence of the
Winmiiju.

# Origins

In Ngujari stories, magic is said to come from the four brothers who discovered
the land they now occupy: Bilru, the Seal; Gunya, the Wallaby; Juunwi, the
Bowerbird; and Pilkiya, the Platypus. The four brothers made their homes in the
environments most suited for their physiology. Bilru constructed his on a rock
formation near the coast, allowing him to spend his days swimming in the ocean.
Gunya settled in the low-lying area next to the beach, where he could find
plenty of food to eat. Juunwi made his home high in the mountains, where he
could soar above the treetops and find beautiful objects to decorate his home.
Pilkiya chose a river that cut through the mountain, so he could enjoy the water
and travel around the whole of the area.

While the four brothers were content with their new home, Winmii, a snake, was
envious of their lands, and decided that he would try to force them out and keep
it for himself and his family. In the middle of the night, while the brothers
were sleeping, he crept up to where they lay and poisoned them. In the morning,
they awoke in great pain and close to death. Realising what Winmii had done,
they decided that they must protect their land even in death, and allowed
themselves to be overcome while conscious, releasing their spirits to defend
their resting place for eternity.

The magic of the land is now said to be these spirits, who allow themselves to
be used by the Ngujari in the fight against Winmii's ancestors,
the [Winmiiju](/yawirra/presettlement/winmiiju).

# Nnurrus

The four Nnurrus are isolated amongst the land of the Ngujari. A brief
description of each is below.

## Bilrunnalu

A great platform of grey rock juts out from the water and is home to a colony of
seals. Bilrunnalu is the most inaccessible of the Nnurrus, with a trip by bark
canoe required to reach the island. Waves are constantly crashing into the
bordering rocks, covering the island in a mist of sea spray and diffusing the
sun's light so that any Panyarni who stands on the island sees only the inside
of a globe of yellow and orange.

## Gunyannalu

This area is a small clearing in the middle of low-lying forest, surrounded by
towering mountains. A small stream cuts through the clearing and brings with it
fish and platypi. At night, glowworms illuminate the area in a constellation of
tiny lights, giving the impression that a Panyarni is standing in the centre of
a globe of stars.

## Juunwinnalu

Sitting at the peak of the highest mountain in the land, the area is damp and
green, and looks out over the lush sclerophyll forests and deep blue ocean.
During the late afternoons, cloud frequently rolls in and covers the
mountaintop, allowing the Panyarni to literally sit inside the clouds.

## Pilkiyannalu

A large waterfall tumbles into a deep lagoon, enclosed on all sides by dense
scrub and tree trunks. Smooth rocks provide stepping stones across the lagoon
and a place to sit in front of the waterfall, back facing the continuing clear
and cool river. Underneath the waterfall is a small cave providing a shelter
with three walls of rock and one of rushing water.

# The Dreamtime

While the Dreamtime refers to the Ngujari cosmological beliefs as a whole, it
also adopts a physical form in the spiritual reality of *Paruuna*. Paruuna
manifests as a separate, non-corporeal dimension, from which all magic flows.

## Personal Duality

Any being in the land of Yawirra is composed of two parts. The corporeal form
originates in the physical world, and includes the body and high-level thought
processes. However, the incorporeal form, or *Muu*, which controls emotion and
spirituality resides in the Dreamtime, and is temporarily meshed with the
physical form soon after birth (see [Life and
Death](/yawirra/presettlement/cosmology));

## Channels

The spirits of the four brothers serve as channels between the real and
spiritual worlds. The spirits are signalled by specific and intricate patterns
painted on the skin of the Panyarni, onto which they *bind* a portion of both
worlds. This channel then allows the spiritual world to overlap with the real
and create magical effects.

The patterns used by the Panyarni are a closely guarded secret, passed to new
members during their elaborate initiation rituals. The Panyarni of each nnurru
guard their own patterns, which signal their specific patron spirit. As such,
the members of each nnurru can perform different magical abilities.

Channels between the worlds are physically and mentally taxing. The brothers,
lacking corporeal form, require the physical stamina of the Panyarni to maintain
the channels. This means that magical effects cannot last long, with most
remaining in effect for less than 3 hours before the user must rest. In
addition, creating multiple channels draws physical energy at a rate
proportional to the number of channels, so mixing magical abilities is only
possible for very short periods of time.

## The Idea of Location

In the Ngujari cosmology there is a distinction between the idea of location
that separates the Dreamtime and physical world. While a physical location
represents a specific place (such as a beach or forest), in the Dreamtime
locations are mapped to *concepts*. There is no such thing as spatial
relationship, rather the Dreamtime is a network of abstract and concrete ideas.
Alongside and interconnected with these abstract ideas are the *Muus* of all
Yawirran beings.

### Travel through the Dreamtime

The most powerful form of magic, available only to the most advanced Panyarni,
is the ability to enter the Dreamtime as a physical entity. This allows the
Panyarni to travel physical distances far greater than they could cover in the
real world.

While most physical locations are not present in the Dreamtime, there exist a
number of totemic locations (such as Ngarlta, the world tree) which maintain
both a physical and spiritual form. Travel between these nodes is possible
through the Dreamtime.

The process begins with markings on the skin. A finely-detailed image of the
desired location must be rendered on the skin. This serves as a map for the
*Muu* of the Dreamtime to consult while they direct the Panyarni on their way.
The more detailed the image, the quicker the travel, as the *Muu* can more
easily find a path to the node in the Dreamtime.

To initiate the journey, the Panyarni must retire to a sheltered location in
their nnurru and brew the drink *wanarri*, a mixture of rare and psychoactive
plants. Drinking the mixture sends the Panyarni into a deep sleep, which allows
the brothers to open a channel wide enough for the whole body of the user to fit
through.

Once inside the Dreamtime, the Panyarni is deaf and blind, held back by their
physical form in a dimension meant for spirits. They therefore are led by the
*Muus* to the desired node, where they are again manifested in physical form.