---
title: Political Parties
layout: page
permalink: /politics/parties/
---

There are currently seven political parties with representation in the
Legislative Assembly.

A coalition between the Agrarian Party, Green Party and the Worker's Alliance
Party has held government since 2015, with the Opposition held by the
Socialist-Democratic Party. The government was able to form a majority with the
support of the Pirate Party, which pledged support in confidence and supply
votes only. The leader of the Agrarian Party, Adalene DuPont, is Prime Minister,
with the leader of the Worker's Alliance Mamri Gupanya holding the role of Vice
Prime Minister.

# Recent History

For a period of over 15 years (1990-2005), the Agrarian Party (AGP) had been the
dominant force in the country's government. However, from 2000 onwards public
support for the party had been waning in many non-rural electorates and it
seemed as if its dominant position would be lost, especially in light of the
rise of the Socialist-Democratic Party (SDP) during the same period. The chief
reason for this decline was the right-wing social policies favoured by its rural
base, but increasingly spurned by progressive urban voters.

Political tensions came to a head during the
[2005 Constitutional Crisis](/yawirra/politics/2005crisis). All parties except for
the Agrarian Party sponsored the passage of a bill authorising the deployment of
combat troops against North Korea following strikes inside the South Korean
border. The AGP strongly opposed such a move, fearing it would drag the whole of
APEMA into war with China, but was easily defeated in the resulting vote.
Desperate to stop the passage of the bill, President Claude Bellin, a former
member of the AGP, used presidential veto for the first time in history. The
ensuing crisis saw the President impeached and decimated the credibility of the
AGP. In the 2006 elections, the party was removed from government and in 2009
plunged to its lowest seat count in history, with even safe seats falling.

Chief benefactor from this dramatic fallout were the Socialist-Democrats, who
were able to form government in 2006 and 2009 with the help of the Worker's
Alliance Party. Both parties had led the charge for the impeachment of the
President and were viewed favourably by the majority of the population for this
role.

In 2009, as a result of the recent fall from grace, the AGP membership resolved
to dissolve the entire leadership team and hold party elections. The winner,
Adalene DuPont, was well-liked, socially left-wing, and burning with ambition
for the party. DuPont overhauled the party structure, streamlining cabinet roles
and developing a comprehensive new policy platform with the aim of regaining the
confidence of Australians. Although she failed to obtain the numbers to overturn
some of the party's controversial social policies, her leadership led to the
rapid return of the AGP to the political landscape.

In 2012, the party regained many lost seats but remained locked out of
government by the dominant SDEs, now joined in coalition by the Pirate Party as
the Worker's Alliance Party's blunders saw it lose ground across the nation.
However, the AGP's meteoric rise continued, and in 2015 it managed to obtain the
highest seat count of all. The resultant negotiations were protracted, with the
Green Party quickly agreeing to join a coalition based on shared environmental
policies but no other party eager to commit. Eventually, the Worker's Alliance
Party agreed to support the coalition on the condition that the shared left-wing
social agenda of the Greens and WAP be allowed to take center stage. Despite
protests from the right of the AGP, DuPont agreed unreservedly. With the tide
shifted in favour of the new coalition, the Pirate Party agreed to support it in
supply and confidence votes and a new socialist was born.

# Party Overviews

## Government

### Agrarian Party

*Leader:* Adalene DuPont (prime minister)

*Party List:* Open

This party traditionally caters to the rural population, but has sought to
rebrand itself around state socialism, welfare, and environmentalism.
Economically, social and agricultural welfare are prioritised, as is a
protectionist foreign policy agenda. The party strongly supports an entirely
government-funded move to renewable energy. Socially, the party is fractured
into left and right members. With slightly greater numbers, the right continues
to dominate the social agenda, including opposition to euthanasia and
restricting abortion to those with medical, social, or economic burdens.

### Worker's Alliance Party

*Leader:* Mamri Gupanya (vice prime minister)

*Party List:* Closed

This party sits more to the centre than the Socialist-Democratic Party, focusing
on a base of unionists and industrial workers and appealing to populist ideals,
particularly worker's rights. Economically, they pursue a protectionist agenda.
Their main point of difference with the Socialist-Democratic Party is their
staunch anti-war stance, and they strongly oppose military intervention against
IS.

### Green Party

*Leader:* Edouard Babineaux

*Party List:* Open

This environmentalist party is favoured by inner-city constituents and pursues a
moderate-left agenda. Economically, the party is committed to social welfare and
opposes any government spending on private education, while limited free trade
is favoured with overseas nations. Income redistribution, including raising
company tax, is a priority for the party.

## Opposition

### Socialist-Democratic Party

*Leader:* Parya Iranga

*Party List:* Closed

With a predominantly urban voting base, this moderate left party supports
increased funding to public services and social welfare. Their economic policy
revolves around increased taxation of high-income earners and income
redistribution programs, with some support for free-trade. This party supports
intervention in Syria and Iraq against IS and no change to immigration levels.

## Crossbench

### Conservative Party

*Leader:* Nnuri Gaudet

*Party List:* Open

This party caters to a Christian base with pro-religion and pro-business
policies. They support a liberal economic ideology, favouring low taxation and
public-private partnerships instead of socialist policies. Their major point of
departure from the other parties is their social conservatism, as they oppose
abortion for non-medical reasons, euthanasia, and mass immigration.

### Pirate Party

*Leader:* Ophelie Wilaru

*Party List:* Open

This radical-left, youth-based party focuses on progressive social policies and
highly socialised economic development. They support free tertiary education and
an end to government funding to private schools, as well as a range of income
redistribution measures including raising company and high-income tax, a banking
super-profits tax, and a capital gains tax.

### Libertarians

*Leader:* Javier Brun

*Party List:* Open

This fledgling party of right-libertarians is strongly in favour of policies
which emphasise individual freedom. Economically, this centres around an
unrestricted free market, and accordingly they desire the abolition of the
public health and education systems and drastically reduced taxation in the
pursuit of small government. They further support increased gun rights,
unconditional euthanasia and abortion and no intervention against Islamic State.
