---
title: History
layout: page
permalink: /history/
---

The history of Yawirra can be broadly split into three stages: pre-settlement,
colonial, and independent. The first is dealt with
in [pre-settlement](/presettlement/), while the remainder is detailed here.

# Early Colonisation

*Main Article:* [Early Colonisation](/history/earlycolonisation/).

Following the loss of New France to Britain in 1763, as a result of the Seven
Years' War, France was searching for new settlement opportunities in an attempt
to solidify her international empire.

In 1771, France sent two missions to the continent of Yawirra, which had been
discovered by the Dutch in the previous century, in an attempt to claim the
promising land. The captains, Yves de Kerguelen and Louis Aleno de St. Aloüarn,
were to meet at Aguillon Bay before travelling in different directions.
However, St. Aloürn arrived to find the bay empty, Kerguelen having
abandoned his mission and returned to France. Running low on supplies, he
landed at Nurni and claimed the southern coast for France, recommending the
site for a future settlement.

On the 19th of January, 1780, Jean-Baptiste Rénard returned to Nurni with a
small fleet and founded the settlement of Concarneau, declaring the province of
Nouvelle Bretagne for France. Soon afterwards, the Treaty of Yirlirnaru was
signed between the settlers and the Ngujari people of the area, forming a
lasting alliance.

Over the next decades, France expanded her colonies throughout the continent,
joined by Great Britain whose First Fleet landed at Botany Bay in 1788. Rising
tensions between the two nations led to the 1805 Turlarru River Compromise,
which separated the continent into two and led to a period of relative
stability.

# The Yawirran Colonial War

The 1830 discovery of the central goldfields in Nouvelle Bretagne led to a
mining boom in the French division of the continent.

In August 1832, all French colonies instituted mandatory gold licenses for
miners. France, concerned about British influence in their colonies, created a
seperate license class for British miners which was more expensive, and carried
restricted rights and higher taxation. A series of protests by British miners
from 1832 to 1834 against the harsh license requirements was accompanied by
acts of sabotage against French government property, sparking accusations by
France that the British government was deliberately inflaming the tensions.

*Main Article:* [Massacre of Wiranumba](/history/massacreofwiranumba/).

The protests came to a head on the 4th of February, 1934, when a group of 40
British miners seized the goldfields administration offices in Wiranumba.
Monhoudou authorities reacted brutally, killing 24 of the miners and
imprisoning the 16 others, suffering 10 deaths in the process.

# Independence

![Front page of Le Quotidien](/assets/images/Independence!.jpg)
